CHAPTER 9
VERSION CONTROL SYSTEMS
9.1 Overview
Version control, also known as source control, is the practice of tracking and managing changes
to software code. Version control systems are software tools that help software teams manage
changes to source code over time.
Basically Version control system keeps track on changes made on a particular software and take a
snapshot of every modification. Let us suppose if a team of developer add some new functionalities
in an application and the updated version is not working properly so as the version control system
keeps track of our work so with the help of version control system, we can omit the new changes
and continue with the previous version. Many version control systems are available in market
like Mercurial, Bitbucket, Helix Core, GIT etc.
9.2 Git
Git is a distributed version control system (DVCS) that helps manage and track changes to source
code during software development. Git is open source, meaning its source code is freely available
and can be modified. Git tracks changes made to files over time. It allows developers to see a
detailed history of changes, revert to previous versions, and collaborate on code with others. Each
developer working on a project has their own copy of the entire repository, including its history.
This allows for decentralized and concurrent work, even without an internet connection.
9.3 Basic terminology
Repository: The database or storage where all the files and their history are stored.
Commit: A snapshot of changes made to files at a specific point in time. Each commit is associated
with a unique identifier.
Branch: A separate line of development. Branches allow developers to work on features or fixes
independently without affecting the main codebase until they're ready to merge their changes.
Merge: The process of integrating changes from one branch into another.
Conflict: Occurs when two or more changes cannot be automatically merged, and manual
intervention is required to resolve the differences.
48Pull Request (PR): In DVCS systems like Git, a pull request is a request to merge changes from one
branch into another. It provides a way for team members to review and discuss changes before they
are merged.
9.4 Basic Commands
git status
‘git status’ tells what's happening in Git repository. It shows which files have been modified, which
ones are staged for a commit, and which ones are untracked (new files not yet added to Git).
git add
‘git add’ is like putting items in a box to be shipped. It stages changes or new files, preparing them
to be included in the next commit (snapshot) of project. Eg., ‘git add filename’ stages changes in
‘filename’ for the next commit.
git log
‘git log’ is a record of all the commits made in the repository. It displays a list of commits along
with their unique identifiers, authors, dates, and commit messages. It helps to see the history of
changes and who made them.
git commit
‘git commit’ is like taking a snapshot of project at a certain point in time. It saves the staged changes
as a new version with a unique identifier and a message describing the changes made in that commit.
git push
‘git push’ is like sharing changes with others or storing them in a central location (like a cloud
server, e.g., GitHub). After committing changes, ‘git push’ uploads these commits from our local
repository to a remote repository, making them available to others and creating backups.
git branch
‘git branch’ is like creating a separate path for our work. It allows to create, list, rename, and delete
branches within our Git repository. A branch is like a parallel universe where we can work on a
feature or fix without affecting the main project until we decide to merge it in.
git checkout
‘git checkout’ is like moving to a different place in our Git universe. It's used to switch between
branches, manipulate files, create new branches, and even travel through our project's history.
499.5 Rebasing
Rebasing is the process of moving or combining a sequence of commits to a new base commit.
Internally, Git accomplishes this by creating new commits and applying them to the specified base.
Even though the branch looks the same, it's composed of entirely new commits.
The primary reason for rebasing is to maintain a linear project history.
Figure 22 git rebase flow
We can perform rebasing by the following command;
git pull --rebase
This command is a combination of two separate Git commands: ‘git pull’ and ‘git rebase’.
• ‘git pull’: This command fetches changes from a remote repository and merges them into the
current branch.
• ‘git rebase’: This means that our local commits will be replayed on top of the updated remote
branch, giving ua a cleaner linear history.
If conflicts arise during the rebase (i.e., if changes in our local commits conflict with changes from
the remote branch), Git pauses the rebase process. We will need to resolve these conflicts by
editing the affected files. We can abort the rebase at any time using ‘git rebase --abort’.
After resolving conflicts: Use ‘git add <file>’ to stage the resolved changes, continue the rebase
process using ‘git rebase –continue’.
509.6 Modifying remote commits
The ‘git format-patch -1’ command creates a patch file for the most recent commit in our
repository. The ‘-1’ flag indicates that we want to create a patch for just the last commit. This
command generates a patch file that contains all the changes introduced in that commit, including
the commit message.
This patch file can be shared with others or applied to another repository using the ‘git apply’ or
‘git am’ commands, allowing them to replicate the changes made in that specific commit. If we
want to generate patches for multiple commits or a specific range of commits, we can adjust the
number accordingly (e.g., ‘-2’ for the last two commits).
Then this needs to be pushed forcefully by using ‘git push origin <branch_name> -f’.
